

E-text prepared by Bethanne M. Simms, Katherine Ward, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's note:

   Hyphenation and punctuation have been changed to be consistent
   throughout the text.

   Probable typographical errors were corrected: "instanteously,"
   "thorougly," "acquiesence," "speculatious," "her's."

   Otherwise the original punctuation and spelling have been
   retained.

   Text enclosed by underscores was in italics (_italics_).

   Text enclosed by equal signs was in bold face (=bold=).

   Greek transliterations are enclosed by tilde characters
   (~Greek~).

   An asterism was changed to three asterisks in a row.

   A Table of Contents was added by the transcriber.





A ROMANTIC YOUNG LADY.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_Mr. Grant is nothing if not entertaining--nothing if not
    subtle. Himself a clever analyst, he defies analysis._"--THE
    UNIVERSITY.

MR. GRANT'S NOVELS.


THE KNAVE OF HEARTS.

1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

    "It is a companion to 'The Confessions of a Frivolous Girl,'
    being the autobiography of a young man who devotes himself to
    the profession of heart-breaking. The various species of
    American female flirts are amusingly and clearly sketched by a
    few light but powerful strokes, and this, together with the
    simple yet surprisingly successful methods employed to make the
    girls' acquaintance, to lead them gently on to the brink of the
    precipice, and then to drop them, instantaneously and utterly,
    makes the book a veritable 'flirt's vade mecum.'"--_The Argonaut._


AN AVERAGE MAN.

1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

    "There is a good strong purpose throughout the story. The style
    is rapid and bright."--_Life._


THE CONFESSIONS OF A FRIVOLOUS GIRL.

1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

    "The greatest social literary hit of the year."--_Chicago Tribune._

    "A screaming success."--_Saturday Review._

    "Clever and piquant sketches--refreshing spirit and
    vivacity."--_Harper's Magazine._


A ROMANTIC YOUNG LADY.

1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

Mr. Grant's latest work, and in many respects his best.

_Sold by booksellers. Sent, postpaid, on receipt of price by the
publishers_,

=TICKNOR & COMPANY, BOSTON.=

       *       *       *       *       *


A ROMANTIC YOUNG LADY

by

ROBERT GRANT

Author of
"The Confessions of a Frivolous Girl,"
"An Average Man,"
"The Knave of Hearts," Etc.







Boston
Ticknor and Company
1886

Copyright, 1886,
by Ticknor and Company.
All rights reserved.

University Press:
John Wilson and Son, Cambridge.




CONTENTS


 BOOK                                         PAGE
   I. Innocence.                                 7
  II. Sophistication.                           71
 III. (Un)common Sense.                        221




BOOK I.

INNOCENCE.


I.

My mother died in giving me birth. My father was a very rich man, a
railway magnate, so called, absorbed in great business enterprises. Thus
it happened that I was brought up between two fires,--my father's
sister, Aunt Agnes; and my mother's sister, Aunt Helen.

Aunt Agnes was prim but cultivated. She wrote for reviews and wore
eye-glasses, and her library table was habitually littered with
pamphlets and tomes. On the other hand, Aunt Helen was a neat, dapper
little woman, who lived in a gem of a house and delighted in bric-Ã -brac
and entertaining. They were both spinsters. Each of them passed one
evening in every week with me. On Tuesdays I dined with Aunt Agnes, and
on Fridays with Aunt Helen. Thus I was alone only two evenings out of
seven, for on Sundays my father did not go to the Club.

From the age of ten until I was fifteen I attended a private school. I
proved ambitious and quick at my books. Aunt Helen was anxious that I
should be well grounded in the modern languages, while Aunt Agnes wished
me to pursue what she styled "serious" studies. In my efforts to please
them both I broke down in health. My father was the first to observe my
pallid cheeks, and at the advice of a physician I was taken away from
school. For nearly a year I was idle, save that I read at random in my
father's library. Then my aunts for once put their heads together and
insisted upon my having a governess. They told my father that the next
three years were the most important in my life, and that the best way to
foster my health was to find some judicious person to be my companion.

Aunt Helen was in favor of one who had youth and good spirits, but Aunt
Agnes thought it important that a governess should inspire respect. I
was not consulted, and my father declined to arbitrate between them. In
the end, the favorite of Aunt Agnes was installed, through the chance
discovery that the other applicant had been at one time on the stage.

Miss Jenks was a kind but sober disciplinarian of fifty. I was her pupil
until I was eighteen; and though I was none the less lonely because of
her companionship, I am in her debt to-day for the pains she took to
systematize my heterogeneous acquirements and teach me the evils of
superficiality. Her views of life were autumnal in tint, and her laugh
was never hearty. She rarely conversed with me at length; but if I made
inquiries concerning any matter of knowledge, I was sure to find a book
or pamphlet on my desk the next day, with slips marking the valuable
pages. She kept me so steadily employed during the hours I was not in
bed or in the fresh air that I had no time for novel-reading,--a pastime
I had indulged in formerly to a considerable extent. I thrived
physically under this regimen, but I became silent and grave. Miss Jenks
seemed constantly on her guard against undue enthusiasm, and abetted by
her example I inclined to introspection and over conscientiousness. I
picked up pins, and went out of my way to kick orange-peel from the
sidewalk, on principle.

But apart from, or rather concurrent with, this sobriety of character I
was a dreamer in secret, and delighted to give the rein to fancy. I
liked to picture myself in some of the romantic situations of which
I had read, and to build castles for the future. But all these
imaginations were of a realistic order, as distinguished from ghosts and
fairies and other creations of that class. I was completely free from
superstitions. It was not for luck that I picked up pins, but that they
should not be wasted. In like manner I never hesitated to let a
horse-shoe lie in the road, to walk under a ladder, or be one of
thirteen at table. And yet I was distinctly a dreamer. If it was in the
way of lovers, my thoughts were entirely subjective. I knew no young men
except the boys at dancing-school; and they as a rule avoided me, for I
was shy, and for the present only moderately pretty. I think I tried in
my day-dreams to form an ideal of what a lover's mental and moral
attributes should be without ever endowing the abstraction with a head.
I found a happiness in doing so much,--akin, I fancy, to that of the
votary who kneels before a shrine of which the doors are closed. It was
the consciousness of a great possible happiness that thrilled me, rather
than any definite vision.

When Miss Jenks left us I was a well educated girl for my age. What I
knew I knew thoroughly, and the wishes of both my aunts had been
respected. Perhaps the most striking circumstances connected with my
bringing up, however, were that at eighteen I had no idea I was the
heiress to an enormous fortune, and that I could pass young men in the
street without self-consciousness. Strangely, too, I had grown up
without having formed an intimacy with any girls of my own age. I have
never quite been able to decide whether the ability I thus acquired to
think for and by myself was more valuable than the happiness that
results from such friendships; yet I have never distinctly regretted not
having made a confidant among my contemporaries.


II.

Miss Jenks went away in October, and a few days later Aunt Helen
broached the subject of preparations for the winter. I was to go into
society; and she had taken upon her shoulders the burden of having me
well-dressed and "presentable," as she called it. My clothes ordered
from Paris were at her house, and she took even more pleasure than I in
studying their effect when tried on, and in selecting from my mother's
jewelry the most appropriate articles for my toilet. There were certain
trinkets among them which she told me were all the rage; and she
concluded with a homily that I was very fortunate to be able to have
such expensive things to wear, and that many girls had to be content
with two ball-dresses, or in some instances with one. I was glad to put
myself entirely in her hands, for I felt that she knew about such
matters. My own sensations were a mixture of timidity, bewilderment, and
exultation.

One evening a short time previous to the beginning of the gay season my
father turned to me and said,--

"There is something I wish to tell you, Virginia. I have recently made
my will. With the exception of a few legacies for charitable uses and a
bequest to each of your aunts, I have left everything to you. Very
likely it may be a surprise to you to hear that you will be very rich.
It is proper and right you should know it now, just as it was important
you should remain in ignorance of the fact during childhood. I have
requested hitherto your aunts and your governess to make no allusions to
your future prospects. If I am not mistaken, you learn the truth from me
for the first time."

He paused as if expecting an answer.

"Yes, it has never occurred to me to inquire about the future," said I.
"I knew that we lived in comfort. Beyond that I have not thought on the
subject."

"It is as I supposed," said my father. "Unless I see reason to alter the
present distribution of my property, you will be one of the richest
women in town. When you were a child, Virginia, I felt badly at times
that you were not a boy; I wanted a son to inherit my name and fortune.
But one day it occurred to me, that, though a daughter could not make
money, she might learn to spend it as well as a son. The thought
comforted me; for I have made all the money we can need for many
generations to come, and my only desire is that when I am gone there
shall be some one to use it as I would like. There is an idea, I know,
that women are not fitted to comprehend the value of money, and that it
is unwise to give them the control of large sums. However correct that
may be, the tendency of all modern legislation shows that the world is
in favor of their administering their own affairs. At any rate, I
propose to make the experiment. Unless you convince me beforehand that I
am mistaken, I shall leave you at my death the mistress of over three
million dollars."

While I was trying to form a definite idea of so much wealth, my father
rose, and going to a side-table took up a large tin box, on the top of
which lay a plush-covered case and a pile of pamphlets.

"In this trunk," he said, "you will find one hundred thousand dollars in
first-rate securities, registered in your name. I want you to learn, so
far as is possible for a woman, the care of property. These newspapers
and reports will help you somewhat. I shall be glad to answer all your
questions, and will keep you supplied with the latest intelligence
relating to your property; for I give you these stocks and bonds to use
as you see fit. You will find a cheque-book and a bank-book inside. One
must learn to appreciate the value of money in order to use it well. I
would not advise you to change your investments at first without
consulting me. You must expect to make mistakes at the outset, but I
have great confidence in your good sense. I should have been afraid to
make the experiment in the case of many girls."

These words of my father brought the tears to my eyes. He had been
watching me after all, while I sometimes half fancied him oblivious of
my existence. At the moment, I was too confused to do more than thank
him and gather up in a dazed way the pamphlets he placed before me. He
put the little key that dangled from the tin box into the lock, and
disclosed to me the parchment securities within.

"Carefully managed, that ought to yield you six per cent net," said he.

"But what am I to do with so much money every year?" I cried aghast.

My father laughed, and said: "That is for you to decide, Virginia. You
will learn only too soon the part that money plays in the world," he
added gravely. "Prepare yourself to be courted and flattered for its
sake. Some people would say, 'Do not destroy her faith in human nature.
She will learn the truth soon enough.' I believe that to be forewarned
is to be forearmed. Good and true men are abundant, but there are
unscrupulous and mercenary ones as well, who will woo you for the sake
of your fortune and not because they love you.

"One word more," said he, without regard to the expression of pain that
overspread my face at his last speech. "Do not be afraid to use your
money. Avoid foolish extravagance, but learn to enjoy life and the
blessings at your disposal. It used to be considered wrong by our
forefathers to surround themselves with beautiful things, and any but
the simplest comforts. Some people are of that opinion still, but I do
not agree with them. Your own good sense will be the best criterion of
what is unduly ostentatious; but never hesitate to have anything you may
wish because you fear the verdict of others. In short, be independent,
and think for yourself if you wish to be happy. Your Aunt Helen has
undertaken the charge of your wardrobe; that is something of which I
know nothing. I can tell when a young lady is well dressed, but I am not
capable of selecting her dresses. Here, however," he said, taking the
plush-covered case from the table, "is something that will make your
toilet more complete."

I started with delight on raising the lid, to discover a superb necklace
of the largest pearls. Under the impulse of the moment I flung my arms
about my father's neck and kissed him. He seemed touched by my
