

E-text prepared by Al Haines



ARMS AND THE WOMAN

A Romance

by

HAROLD MacGRATH







New York
Doubleday Page & Company
1905
Copyright, 1899, by
S. S. Mcclure Co.
Copyright, 1899, by
Doubleday and Mcclure Co.





To her, that is to say, to the hand that rocked the cradle.




ARMS AND THE WOMAN

CHAPTER I

The first time I met her I was a reporter in the embryonic state and
she was a girl in short dresses.  It was in a garden, surrounded by
high red brick walls which were half hidden by clusters of green vines,
and at the base of which nestled earth-beds, radiant with roses and
poppies and peonies and bushes of lavender lilacs, all spilling their
delicate ambrosia on the mild air of passing May.  I stood, straw hat
in hand, wondering if I had not stumbled into some sweet prison of
flowers which, having run disobedient ways in the past, had been placed
here by Flora, and forever denied their native meadows and
wildernesses.  And this vision of fresh youth in my path, perhaps she
was some guardian nymph.  I was only twenty-two--a most impressionable
age.  Her hair was like that rare October brown, half dun, half gold;
her eyes were cool and restful, like the brown pools one sees in the
heart of the forests, and her lips and cheeks cozened the warm
vermilion of the rose which lay ever so lightly on the bosom of her
white dress.  Close at hand was a table upon which stood a pitcher of
lemonade.  She was holding in her hand an empty glass.  As my eyes
encountered her calm, inquiring gaze, my courage fled precipitately,
likewise the object of my errand.  There was a pause; diffidence and
embarrassment on my side, placidity on hers.

"Well, sir?" said she, in a voice the tone of which implied that she
could readily understand her presence in the garden, but not mine.

As I remember it, I was suddenly seized with a great thirst.

"I should like a glass of your lemonade," I answered, bravely laying
down the only piece of money I possessed.

Her stern lips parted in a smile, and my courage came back cautiously,
that is to say, by degrees.  She filled a glass for me, and as I gulped
it down I could almost detect the flavor of lemon and sugar.

"It is very good," I volunteered, passing back the glass.  I held out
my hand, smiling.

"There isn't any change," coolly.

I flushed painfully.  It was fully four miles to Newspaper Row.  I was
conscious of a sullen pride.  Presently the object of my errand
returned.  Somewhat down the path I saw a gentleman reclining in a
canvas swing.

"Is that Mr. Wentworth?" I asked.

"Yes.  Do you wish to speak to him?  Uncle Bob, here is a gentleman who
desires to speak to you."

I approached.  "Mr. Wentworth," I began, cracking the straw in my hat,
"my name is John Winthrop.  I am a reporter.  I have called to see if
it is true that you have declined the Italian portfolio."

"It is true," he replied kindly.  "There are any number of reasons for
my declining it, but I cannot make them public.  Is that all?"

"Yes, sir; thank you;" and I backed away.

"Are you a reporter?" asked the girl, as I was about to pass by her.

"Yes, I am."

"Do you draw pictures?"

"No, I do not."

"Do you write novels?"

"No," with a nervous laugh.

There is nothing like the process of interrogation to make one person
lose interest in another.

"Oh; I thought perhaps you did," she said, and turned her back to me.

I passed through the darkened halls of the house and into the street.

I never expected to see her again, but it was otherwise ordained.   We
came together three years later at Block Island.  She was eighteen now,
gathering the rosy flowers of her first season.  She remembered the
incident in the garden, and we laughed over it.  A few dances, two or
three evenings on the verandas, watching the sea, moon-lit, as it
sprawled among the rocks below us, and the even tenor of my way ceased
to be.  I appreciated how far she was above me; so I worshipped her
silently and from afar.  I told her my ambitions, confidences so
welcome to feminine ears, and she rewarded me with a small exchange.
She, too, was an orphan, and lived with her uncle, a rich banker, who,
as a diversion, consented to represent his country at foreign courts.
Her given name was Phyllis.  I had seen the name a thousand times in
print; the poets had idealised it, and the novelists had embalmed it in
tender phrases.  It was the first time I had ever met a woman by the
name of Phyllis.  It appealed to my poetic instinct.  Perhaps that was
the cause of it all.  And then, she was very beautiful.  In the autumn
of that year we became great friends; and through her influence I began
to see beyond the portals of the mansions of the rich.  Matthew Prior's
Chloes and Sir John Suckling's Euphelias lost their charms.  Henceforth
my muse's name became Phyllis.  I took her to the opera when I didn't
know where I was going to breakfast on the morrow.  I sent her roses
and went without tobacco, a privation of which woman knows nothing.

Often I was plunged into despair at my distressed circumstances.  Money
to her meant something to spend; to me it meant something to get.  Her
income bothered her because she could not spend it; my income was
mortgaged a week in advance, and did not bother me at all.  This was
the barrier at my lips.  But her woman's intuition must have told her
that she was a part and parcel of my existence.

I had what is called a forlorn hope: a rich uncle who was a planter in
Louisiana.  His son and I were his only heirs.  But this old planter
had a mortal antipathy to my side of the family.  When my mother, his
sister, married Alfred Winthrop in 1859, at the time when the North and
South were approaching the precipice of a civil war, he considered all
family ties obliterated.  We never worried much about it.  When mother
died he softened to the extent of being present at the funeral.  He
took small notice of my father, but offered to adopt me if I would
assume his name.  I clasped my father's hand in mine and said nothing.
The old man stared at me for a moment, then left the house.  That was
the first and last time I ever saw him.  Sometimes I wondered if he
would remember me in his will.  This, of course, was only when I had
taken Phyllis somewhere, or when some creditor had lost patience.  One
morning in January, five years after my second meeting with Phyllis, I
sat at my desk in the office.  It was raining; a cold thin rain.  The
window was blurred.  The water in the steam-pipes went banging away.  I
was composing an editorial which treated the diplomatic relations
between this country and England.  The roar of Park Row distracted me.
Now and then I would go to the window and peer down on the living
stream below.  A dense cloud of steam hung over all the city.  I swore
some when the copy boy came in and said that there was yet a column and
a half to fill, and that the foreman wanted to "close up the page
early."  The true cause of my indisposition was due to the rumors rife
in the office that morning.  Rumors which emanate from the managing
editor's room are usually of the sort which burden the subordinate ones
with anxiety.  The London correspondent was "going to pieces."  He had
cabled that he was suffering from nervous prostration, supplementing a
request for a two months' leave of absence.  For "nervous prostration"
we read "drink."  Our London correspondent was a brilliant journalist;
he had written one or two clever books; he had a broad knowledge of men
and affairs; and his pen was one of those which flashed and burned at
frequent intervals; but he drank.  Dan's father had been a victim of
the habit.  I remember meeting the elder Hillars.  He was a picturesque
individual, an accomplished scholar, a wide traveller, a diplomatist,
and a noted war correspondent.  His work during the Franco-Prussian war
had placed him in the front rank.  After sending his son Dan to college
he took no further notice of him.  He was killed while serving his
paper at the siege of Alexandria, Egypt.  Dan naturally followed his
father's footsteps both in profession and in habits.  He had been my
classmate at college, and no one knew him better than I, except it was
himself.  The love of adventure and drink had ended the life of the
one; it might end the life of the other.

The foreman in the composing room waited some time for that required
column and a half of editorial copy.  I lit my pipe; and my thoughts
ran back to the old days, to the many times Dan had paid my debts and
to the many times I had paid his.  Ah, me! those were days when love
and fame and riches were elusive and we went in quest of them.  The
crust is hyssop when the heart is young.  The garret is a palace when
hope flies unfettered.  The most wonderful dreams imaginable are dreamt
close to the eaves.  And when a man leaves behind him the garret, he
also leaves behind the fondest illusions.  But who--who would stay in
the garret!

And as my thoughts ran on, the question rose, Whom would they send in
his place--Dan's?  I knew London.  It was familiar ground.  Perhaps
they might send me.  It was this thought which unsettled me.  I was
perfectly satisfied with New York.  Phyllis lived in New York.  There
would be time enough for London when we were married.  Then I began to
build air castles.  A newspaper man is the architect of some splendid
structures, but he thoughtlessly builds on the sand when the tide is
out.  Yes, foreign corresponding would be all well enough, I mused,
with Phyllis at my side.  With her as my wife I should have the envy of
all my fellow craftsmen.  We should dine at the embassies and the
attach√©s would flutter about us, and all London would talk of the
beautiful "Mrs. Winthrop."  Then the fire in my pipe-bowl went out.
The copy boy was at my elbow again.

"Hang you!" said I.

"The foreman says he's coming down with an axe," replied the boy.

It was like churning, but I did manage to grind the copy.  I was
satisfied that the United States and Great Britain would not go to war
over it.

The late afternoon mail brought two letters.  I opened the one from
Phyllis first.  It said:


"DEAR JACK--Uncle Bob has a box for the opera to-night, but he has been
suddenly called to Washington; politics, possibly, but he would not
say.  Aunty and I want you to go with us in his stead.  Ethel and her
fianc√©, Mr. Holland, will be together, which means that Aunty and I
will have no one to talk to unless you come.  Carmen is to be sung.
Please do not fail me.

"PHYLLIS."


Fail her!  I thought not.

Then I read the second letter.  I read it three or four times, and even
then I was not sure that I was not dreaming.  I caught up my pipe
again, filled it and lit it.  I read the letter once more.  I was
solemnly informed that my uncle was dead and that I was mentioned in
the will, and that if I would kindly call at the Hoffman House the
following morning a certain sum of money would be given to me.  I
regretted that I had reached that age when a man's actions must be
dignified, although alone; otherwise I dare say I should have danced
the pas seul.  Whatever my uncle's bequest might be, I believed that it
would make me independently rich.  I am ashamed to admit that I did not
feel sorry at the news of his sudden departure from this life.  It is
better to be rich than to be ambitious.  It is better to have at hand
what you want than to work for it, and then not get it.  Phyllis was
scarcely an arm's length away now.  I whistled as I locked up my desk,
and proceeded down stairs and sang a siren song into the waxen ears of
the cashier.

"You have only twenty coming this week, Mr. Winthrop," said he.

"Never mind," I replied; "I'll manage to get along next week."  It was
only on very rare occasions that I drew my full pay at the end of the
week.

I dined at a fashionable restaurant.  As I sipped my wine I built one
of my castles, and Phyllis reigned therein.  There would be a trip to
Europe every summer, and I should devote my time to writing novels.  My
picture would be the frontispiece in the book reviews, and wayside
paragraphs would tell of the enormous royalties my publishers were
paying me.  I took some old envelopes from my pocket and began figuring
on the backs of them as to what purposes the money should be put.  It
could not be less than $50,000, perhaps more.  Of course my uncle had
given a harbor to a grudge against me and mine, but such things are
always forgotten on the death bed.  It occurred to me that I never had
known before what a fine world it was, and I regretted having spoken
ill of it.  I glanced across the way.  The sky had cleared, and the
last beams of the sun flamed in the windows of the tall buildings.
Fortune, having buffeted me, was now going to make me one of her
favorite children.  I had reached the end of the long lane.

As I left the restaurant I decided to acquaint Phyllis with my good
luck and also my desire that she should share of it.  I turned into a
florist's and had a dozen roses sent up to her.  They were American
Beauties.  I could afford it now.


I found Phyllis thrumming on the piano.  She was singing in a low voice
the aria from "Lucia."  I stood on the threshold of the drawing-room
and waited till she had done.  I believed her to be unaware of my
presence.  She was what we poets call a "dream of loveliness," a
tangible dream.  Her neck and shoulders were like satin, and the head
above them reminded me of Sappho's which we see in marble.  From where
I stood I could catch a glimpse of the profile, the nose and firm chin,
the exquisite mouth, to kiss which I would gladly have given up any
number of fortunes.  The cheek had that delicate curve of a rose leaf,
and when the warm blood surged into it there was a color as matchless
as that of a jack-rose.  Ah, but I loved her.  Suddenly the music
ceased.

"There is a mirror over the piano, Jack," she said, without turning her
head.

So I crossed the room and sat down in the chair nearest her.  I vaguely
wondered if, at the distance, she had seen the love in my eyes when I
thought myself unobserved.

"I thank you for those lovely roses," she said, smiling and permitting
me to press her hand.

"Don't mention it," I replied.  It is so difficult for a man to say
original things in the presence of the woman he loves!  "I have great
news for you.  It reads like a fairy tale, you know; happy ever
afterward, and all that."

"Ah!"

"Yes.  Do you remember my telling you of a rich uncle who lived in the
South?"

"Is it possible that he has left you a fortune?" she cried, her eyes
shining.

"You have guessed it."

"I am very glad for your sake, Jack.  I was beginning to worry about
you."

"Worry about me?"

"Yes.  I do not understand how a newspaper man can afford to buy roses
four or five times a week--and exist."  She had the habit of being
blunt and frank to her intimate friends.  I secretly considered it an
honor when she talked to me like this.  "I have told you repeatedly to
send me flowers only once a week.  I'd rather not have them at all.
Last week you spent as much as $30 on roses alone.  Mr. Holland does
