

E-text prepared by David Edwards, Martin Pettit, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive (http://archive.org/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 39689-h.htm or 39689-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/39689/39689-h/39689-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/39689/39689-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://archive.org/details/satansanderson00riverich





SATAN SANDERSON

      *      *      *      *      *

Books by

HALLIE ERMINIE RIVES (Mrs. Post Wheeler)


A FURNACE OF EARTH

HEARTS COURAGEOUS
  Illustrated by A. B. Wenzell

THE CASTAWAY
  Illustrated by Howard Chandler Christy

TALES FROM DICKENS
  Illustrated by Reginald B. Birch

SATAN SANDERSON
  Illustrated by A. B. Wenzell

      *      *      *      *      *


[Illustration]


SATAN SANDERSON

by

HALLIE ERMINIE RIVES

Author of
The Castaway, Hearts Courageous, etc.

With Illustrations by A. B. Wenzell







Indianapolis
The Bobbs-Merrill Company
Publishers

Copyright 1907
The Bobbs-Merrill Company

August

Press of
Braunworth & Co.
Bookbinders and Printers
Brooklyn, N. Y.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                      PAGE
      I AS A MAN SOWS                           1

     II DOCTOR MOREAU                          15

    III THE COMING OF A PRODIGAL               20

     IV THE LANE THAT HAD NO TURNING           32

      V THE BISHOP SPEAKS                      47

     VI WHAT CAME OF A WEDDING                 50

    VII OUT OF THE DARK                        60

   VIII "AM I MY BROTHER'S KEEPER?"            68

     IX AFTER A YEAR                           75

      X THE GAME                               85

     XI HALLELUJAH JONES TAKES A HAND          95

    XII THE FALL OF THE CURTAIN               105

   XIII THE CLOSED DOOR                       108

    XIV THE WOMAN WHO REMEMBERED              115

     XV THE MAN WHO HAD FORGOTTEN             125

    XVI THE AWAKENING                         137

   XVII AT THE TURN OF THE TRAIL              147

  XVIII THE STRENGTH OF THE WEAK              155

    XIX THE EVIL EYE                          160

     XX MRS. HALLORAN TELLS A STORY           167

    XXI A VISIT AND A VIOLIN                  171

   XXII THE PASSING OF PRENDERGAST            179

  XXIII A RACE WITH DEATH                     187

   XXIV ON SMOKY MOUNTAIN                     198

    XXV THE OPEN WINDOW                       210

   XXVI LIKE A THIEF IN THE NIGHT             222

  XXVII INTO THE GOLDEN SUNSET                229

 XXVIII THE TENANTLESS HOUSE                  238

   XXIX THE CALL OF LOVE                      250

    XXX IN A FOREST OF ARDEN                  259

   XXXI THE REVELATION OF HALLELUJAH JONES    269

  XXXII THE WHITE HORSE SKIN                  277

 XXXIII THE RENEGADE                          282

  XXXIV THE TEMPTATION                        289

   XXXV FELDER TAKES A CASE                   302

  XXXVI THE HAND AT THE DOOR                  305

 XXXVII THE PENITENT THIEF                    311

XXXVIII A DAY FOR THE STATE                   319

  XXXIX THE UNSUMMONED WITNESS                331

     XL FATE'S WAY                            335

    XLI FELDER WALKS WITH DOCTOR BRENT        339

   XLII THE RECKONING                         344

  XLIII THE LITTLE GOLD CROSS                 353

   XLIV THE IMPOSTOR                          360

    XLV AN APPEAL TO CÃ†SAR                    369

   XLVI FACE TO FACE                          376

  XLVII BETWEEN THE MILLSTONES                384

 XLVIII THE VERDICT                           390

   XLIX THE CRIMSON DISK                      395

      L WHEN DREAMS COME TRUE                 397




SATAN SANDERSON




CHAPTER I

AS A MAN SOWS


"_To my son Hugh, in return for the care and sorrow he has caused me all
the days of his life, for his dissolute career and his desertion, I do
give and bequeath the sum of one thousand dollars and the memory of his
misspent youth._"

It was very quiet in the wide, richly furnished library. The May night
was still, but a faint suspiration, heavy with the fragrance of jasmin
flowers, stirred the Venetian blind before the open window and rustled
the moon-silvered leaves of the aspens outside. As the incisive
professional pronouncement of the judge cut through the lamp-lighted
silence, the grim, furrowed face with its sunken eyes and gray military
mustaches on the pillow of the wheel-chair set more grimly; a girl
seated in the damask shadow of the fire-screen caught her breath; and
from across the polished table the Reverend Henry Sanderson turned his
handsome, clean-shaven face and looked at the old man.

A peevish misogynist the neighborhood labeled the latter, with the
parish chapel for hobby, and for thorn-in-the-flesh this only son Hugh,
a black sheep whose open breaches of decorum the town had borne as best
it might, till the tradition of his forebears took him off to an eastern
university. A reckless life there and three wastrel years abroad, had
sent him back to resume his peccadilloes on a larger scale, to quarrel
bitterly with his father, and to leave his home in anger. In what rough
business of life was Hugh now chewing the cud of his folly? Harry
Sanderson was wondering.

"Wait," came the querulous voice from the chair. "Write in 'graceless'
before the word 'desertion'."

"_For his dissolute career and his--graceless--desertion_," repeated the
lawyer, the parchment crackling under his pen.

The stubborn antagonism that was a part of David Stires' nature flared
under the bushy eyebrows. "As a man sows!" he said, a kind of bitter
jocularity in the tone. "That should be the text, if this sermon of mine
needed any, Sanderson! It won't have as large an audience as your
discourses draw, but it will be remembered by one of its hearers, at
least."

Judge Conwell glanced curiously at Harry Sanderson as he blotted the
emendation. He knew the liking of the cross-grained and taciturn old
invalid--St. James' richest parishioner--for this young man of
twenty-five who had come to the parish only two months before, fresh
from his theological studies, to fill a place temporarily vacant--and
had stayed by sheer force of personality. He wondered if, aside from
natural magnetic qualities, this liking had not been due first of all to
the curious resemblance between the young minister and the absent son
whom David Stires was disinheriting. For, as far as mold of feature
went, the young minister and the ne'er-do-well might have been twin
brothers; yet a totally different manner and coloring made this likeness
rather suggestive than striking.

No one, perhaps, had ever interested the community more than had Harry
Sanderson. He had entered upon his duties with the marks of youth, good
looks, self-possession and an ample income thick upon him, and had
brought with him a peculiar charm of manner and an apparent incapacity
for doing things in a hackneyed way. Convention sat lightly upon Harry
Sanderson. He recognized few precedents, either in the new methods and
millinery with which he had invested the service, or in his personal
habits. Instead of attending the meeting of St. Andrew's Guild, after
the constant custom of his predecessor, he was apt to be found playing
his violin (a passion with him) in the smart study that adjoined the
Gothic chapel where he shepherded his fashionable flock, or tramping
across the country with a briar pipe in his mouth and his brown spaniel
"Rummy" nosing at his heels. His athletic frame and clean-chiselled
features made him a rare figure for the reading-desk, as his violin
practice, the cut of his golf-flannels, the immaculate elegance of his
motor-car--even the white carnation he affected in his buttonhole--made
him for the younger men a goodly pattern of the cloth; and it had
speedily grown to be the fashion to hear the brilliant young minister,
to memorize his classical aphorisms or to look up his latest quotation
from Keats or Walter Pater. So that Harry Sanderson, whose innovations
had at first disturbed and ruffled the sensibilities of those who would
have preferred a fogy, in the end had drifted, apparently without
special effort, into a far wider popularity than that which bowed to the
whim of the old invalid in the white house in the aspens.

Something of all this was in the lawyer's mind as he paused--a
perfunctory pause--before he continued:

"_... I do give and bequeath the sum of one thousand dollars, and the
memory of his misspent youth._"

Harry Sanderson's eyes had wandered from the chair to the slim figure
of the girl who sat by the screen. This was Jessica Holme, the orphaned
daughter of a friend of the old man's early years, who had recently come
to the house in the aspens to fill the void left by Hugh's departure.
Harry could see the contour of throat and wrists, the wild-rose mesh of
the skin against the Romney-blue gown, the plenteous red-bronze hair
uncoiled and falling in a single braid, and the shadowy pathos of her
eyes. Clear hazel eyes they were, wide and full, but there was in them
no depth of expression--for Jessica Holme was blind. As the crisp
deliberate accent pointed the judicial period, as with a subterranean
echo of irrefutable condemnation, Harry saw her under lip indrawn, her
hands clasp tightly, then unclasp in her lap. Pliant, graceful hands, he
thought, which even blindness could not make maladroit. In the chapel
porch stood the figure of an angel which she had modelled solely by the
wonderful touch in the finger-tips.

"Go on," rasped the old man.

"_The residue of my estate, real and personal, I do give and bequeath to
my ward, Jessica Holme, to be and become--_"

He broke off suddenly, for the girl was kneeling by the chair, groping
for the restless hand that wandered on the afghan, and crying in a
strained, agitated voice: "No ... no ... you must not! Please, please! I
never could bear it!"

"Why not?" The old man's irritant query was belligerent. "Why not? What
is there for you to bear, I'd like to know!"

"He is your son!"

"In the eyes of the law, yes. But not otherwise!" His voice rose. "What
has he done to deserve anything from me? What has he had all his life
but kindness? And how has he repaid it? By being a waster and a
prodigal. By setting me in contempt, and finally by forsaking me in my
old age for his own paths of ribaldry."

The girl shook her head. "You don't know where he is now, or what he is
doing. Oh, he was wild and reckless, I have no doubt. But when he
quarrelled and left you, wasn't it perhaps because he was too
quick-tempered? And if he hasn't come back, isn't it perhaps because he
is too proud? Why, he wouldn't be your son if he weren't proud! No
matter how sorry he might be, it would make no difference then. I could
