



Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           THE ALTERNATIVE

                      By GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON

    Author of "The Husbands of Edith," "The Purple Parasol," "The
    Flyers," "The Butterfly Man," Etc.


    WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
    By HARRISON FISHER

    A. L. BURT COMPANY
    PUBLISHERS             NEW YORK

    Copyright, 1909, by
    DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY

    Published, April, 1909




[Illustration: "'Agrippa! Come here, sir!'"]




Contents


    CHAPTER I THE VAN PYCKES 1

    CHAPTER II A YOUNG LADY ENTERS 26

    CHAPTER III THE AMAZING MARRIAGE 53

    CHAPTER IV THE SECRETARY GOES HOME 78

    CHAPTER V HIS FIRST HOLIDAY 97




Illustrations


    "'Agrippa! Come here, sir!'" (_Frontispiece_)

    "'I am Mrs. De Foe's secretary,' she said quietly"

    "He was there. In fact he opened the door and assisted her to
    alight"

    "Her eyes were closed. He kissed the lids"




THE ALTERNATIVE




CHAPTER I

THE VAN PYCKES


A shrieking wind, thick with the sleety snow that knows no mercy nor
feels remorse, beat vainly and with savage insolence against the staid
windows in the lounging room of one of New York's most desirable
clubs--one of those characteristic homes for college men who were up for
membership on the day they were born, if one may speak so broadly of the
virtue that links the early eighteenth-century graduate with his
great-grandson of the class of 1908. Not to say, of course, that the
eighteenth-century graduate was so carefully preserved from the biting
snowstorm as the fellow of to-day, but that he got his learning in the
ancient halls that now grind out his descendants by the hundred, one way
or another. It is going much too far to assert that every member of this
autocratic club had a colonial ancestor in college, but you'd think so
if you didn't pin him down to an actual confession to the contrary. It
is likely to be the way with college men who do not owe their degrees to
certain mushroom institutions in the West, where electricity and
mechanics are considered to be quite as necessary to a young man's
equipment as the acquaintance, by tradition, with somebody's
great-grandaddy, no matter how eminent he may have been in his
primogenial day.

All of which is neither here nor there. Ancestors for the future are in
the club this night, enjoying the luxury, the coziness, the warmth, and
the present good cheer of a great and glorious achievement: they are
inside of solid walls on this bitter night, eating or tippling, smoking
or toasting, reading or chatting with small regard for the ancient
gentlemen who gave their _Alma Mater_ its name, but who, if suddenly
come to life, would pass away again in a jiffy, not so much through the
shock of opulence as at the sight of the wicked high-ball.

At one of the windows, overlooking a broad street, stood two elderly
gentlemen, conversing in no mild tones about the blizzard.
Straight-backed, dignified gentlemen, they. They kept their hands
clasped behind their backs, smoked very good cigars instead of cigarets,
and spoke not of the chorus that gamboled just around a certain corner,
but of the blizzard that did the same thing--in a less exalted
manner--around _all_ corners.

A thin, arrogant figure crossed from the hallway doors, his watery green
eyes sweeping the group of young men at the lower end of the room.
Evidently the person for whom he was looking was not among them. As he
was turning toward the two elderly gentlemen in the window, one of the
joyous spirits of 1908 saw him, and called out:

"Hello, Mr. Van Pycke! Lookin' for Buzzy?"

The thin old gentleman paused. He lifted his nose-glasses and
deliberately set them upon the bridge of his long, aristocratic,--and we
must say it,--somewhat rose-tinted nose. Then his slim fingers dropped
to the end of his neat gray mustache. A coolly impersonal stare sought
out the speaker.

"Good evening," he said, in the most suave manner possible. No one would
have suspected that he was unable to recall the name of the youth who
put the question. "Yes, I rather expected to find Bosworth here. He said
something about dining here."

"He's upstairs in Peter Palmer's room."

"Thank you. I sha'n't disturb him. Disagreeable night, gentlemen."

The back of his spike-tailed coat confronted the group an instant later;
he was crossing the room, headed for the gray-heads in the window.

"Good evening, Billings. How are you, Knapp? A beastly night."

The three did not shake hands. They had passed that stage long ago. They
did nothing that they didn't have to do.

"I was just telling Knapp that it reminds me of the blizzard in--"

"Stop right there, Billings," interrupted Mr. Van Pycke. "It reminds me
of every blizzard that has happened within my recollection. They're all
alike--theoretically. A lot of wind, snow, and talk about the poor. Sit
down here and have your liqueurs with me."

"I'm glad I don't have to go in all this to-night," said little Mr.
Billings, '59, unconsciously pressing his knees together as he sat down
at the small table.

"You're getting old, Billings."

"So are you, Van Pycke. Demmit, I'm not more than two years older than
you. What's more, you have a grown son."

"My dear fellow, Bosworth is only twenty-five. A man doesn't have to be
a Methuselah to have a grown son. They grow up like weeds. And some of
them amount to about as much as--ahem! Ahem! Please press that button
for me, will you, Knapp? I don't see why the devil they always have the
button on the other side of the table. No, no! I'll sign for them, old
chap. Don't think of it! Here, boy, let me have the ticket. Mr. Knapp
rang, but he did it to oblige me. Now, see here, Knapp, I don't like
that sort of--"

"My dear Van Pycke, permit me! Billings is having his coffee with me.
It's coming now. I insist on adding the cordial."

"Very well, if you insist. Napoleon brandy with a single drop of
Cura√ßao. Mind you,--a single drop, waiter. Ever try that fine old
brandy, Knapp?"

"I can't afford it," said Knapp, bluntly.

"It's the only kind that I can drink," was all that Van Pycke said,
lifting his thin eyebrows ever so slightly.

"Yes, it's a rotten night," put in Mr. Billings with excellent haste.

Knapp's face had gone a trifle red.

Down at the other end of the room the "young bucks" were discussing the
seared trio under the smileless portrait of a college founder. They
spoke in rather subdued tones, with frequent glances toward the door at
their left.

"Old Van Pycke is the darndest sponge in the club. He never buys a
drink, and yet he's always drinking," said one young man.

"His nose shows that all right. I hate a pink nose."

"You'd think he owned the club, the way he treats it," said another.

"Tell me about him," said a new member--from the West. "He's the most
elegant, the most fastidious gentleman I've ever seen. An old family?"

"Rather! The Van Pyckes are as old as Bowling Green. Some of 'em came
over in the Ark--or was it the 'Mayflower'?"

"Buzzy came over in the 'Lusitania' last year," ventured one of them.

The self-appointed historian, a drawler with ancestors in Trinity
churchyard, went on: "Buckets of blue blood in 'em. The old man there is
the last of his type. His son, Buzzy,--Bosworth Van Pycke,--he's the
chap who gave the much-talked of supper for Carmen the other night--he's
really a different sort. Or would be, I should have said, if he had half
a chance. Buzzy's a good fellow--a regular--"

"You bet he is!" exclaimed two or three approvingly.

"The old man's got queer ideas about Buzzy. He insists on his being a
regular gentleman."

"Nothing queer in that," interrupted the Westerner.

"Except that he thinks a fellow can't be a gentleman unless he's a
loafer. He brought Buzzy up with the understanding that it wasn't
necessary for him to be anything but a Van Pycke. The Van Pycke name,
and all that sort of rot. It wouldn't be so bad if the old man had
anything to back it up with. He hasn't a sou markee. That's the
situation. For the last twenty years he's lived in the clubs, owing
everybody and always being a gentleman about it. He has a small interest
in the business of Rubenstein, Rosenthal & Meyer,--logical but not
lineal descendants of the Van Pyckes who were gentlemen in dread of a
rainy day,--but he doesn't get much out of it. Five or six thousand a
year, I'd say. When Buzzy's maternal grandfather died, he left something
in trust for the boy. Fixed it in such a way that he isn't to have the
principal until he's fifty. By that time the old man over there will
have passed in his checks. Catch the point? It was done to keep the
amiable son-in-law from getting his fingers on the pile and squandering
it as he squandered two or three other paternal and grand-paternal
fortunes. Buzzy has about ten thousand a year from the trust fund. I
know that he pays some of his father's debts--not all of 'em, of course;
just the embarrassing kind that he hears about from creditors who really
want their money. In a way, the old man has spoiled Buzzy. He has always
pounded it into the boy's head that it isn't necessary to work--in fact,
it's vulgar. When Buzzy first came into the club, two years ago, he was
insufferable. At college, every one liked him. He was himself when out
from under the old man's influence. After he left college, he set
himself up as Van Pycke, gentleman. The old man told him the name was
worth five millions at least. All he had to do was to wait around a bit
and he'd have no trouble in marrying that amount or more. Marriage is
the best business in the world for a gentleman, he argues. I've heard
him say so myself.

"Well, Buzzy's pretty much of a frivoler, but he isn't a cad. He'd like
to do right, I'm sure. He didn't get started right, that's all. He goes
about drinking tea and making love and spending all he has--like a
gentleman. Just sleeps, eats, and frivols, that's all. He'll never
amount to a hang. It's a shame, too. He's a darned good sort."

At the little table down the room Van Pycke, senior, was holding forth
in his most suave, convincing manner.

"Gentlemen, I don't know what New York is coming to. There are not ten
real gentlemen between the Battery and Central Park. Nothing but money
grabbers. They don't know how to live. They eat like the devil and drink
as though they lived in an aquarium; and they say they're New Yorkers."

Mr. Van Pycke's patrician nose was a shade redder than usual. Billings,
paying no heed to his remarks, was trying to remember how Van Pycke
looked before his nose was thoroughly pickled. It was a long way back,
thought Mr. Billings, vaguely.

"I think I'll have a high-ball," said Mr. Van Pycke. "Have something,
Knapp? Billings? Oh, I remember: you don't drink immediately after
dinner. Splendid idea, too. I think I'll follow your example, to-night
at least. I have a rather important--er--engagement, later on." He
twirled his mustache fondly.

"You'll pursue the fair sex up to the very brink of the grave, Van
Pycke," grumbled Knapp.

"If you mean my own grave, yes," said the other, calmly. "If you mean
that I'll pursue any fair sexton to the brink of _her_ grave, you're
mistaken. I don't like old women. By the way, Knapp, do you happen to
know Jim Scoville's widow?"

"You mean _young_ Jim Scoville?"

"Certainly. I don't discuss dowagers. Everybody knows the old one. I
mean the pretty Mrs. Scoville."

"More or less scandal about her, isn't there?" ventured Billings,
pricking up his ears.

"Not a grain of truth in it, not a grain," retorted Mr. Van Pycke in
such a way that you had the feeling he wanted you to believe there _was_
scandal and that he was more or less connected with it. He studied the
chandelier in a most evasive manner. "Ahem! Do you know her?"

"Only by reputation," said Knapp, with gentle irony.

"I've seen her," said Billings. "At the horse show. Or was it the
automobile--"

"I was in her box at one and in her tonneau at the other," said Mr. Van
Pycke, taking the cigar Knapp extended. He glanced at his watch with
sudden interest. "Yes, I see quite a bit of her. Charming girl--ahem! Of
course" (punctuating his opinion with deliberate care) "she has been
talked about, in a way. Lot of demmed old tabbies around town rippin'
her up the back whenever she turns to look the other way. Old Mrs.
Scoville is the queen tabby. She hates the young Mrs. Jim like poison.
And, come to think of it, I don't blame the dowager. Charlotte is one of
the most attract--"

"Charlotte!" exclaimed Knapp. "Do you call her Charlotte?"

"Certainly!" said Mr. Van Pycke, with a chilly uplifting of his
eyebrows.

"I thought her name was Laura," said Billings, who read all the gossip
in the weekly periodicals.

Mr. Van Pycke coughed. There seemed some likelihood of his bursting, the
fit lasted so long.

"Charlotte is a pet name we have for her," he explained, somewhat
huskily, when it was over. "Demmed stupid of me!" he was saying to
himself. "As I said before, I don't blame the old lady. Young Mrs. Jim
has got five or six of the Scoville millions, and she's showing the
family how to spend it. Her husband's been dead over two years. She's
got a perfect right to take notice of other men and to have a bit of fun
if she takes the notion. Hasn't she? I--I--it wouldn't surprise me at
all if she were to take a new husband unto herself before long." He
uttered a very conscious cackle and looked at his watch quite
suddenly--or past it, rather, for he forgot to open the virtuously
chased hunting case.

