



Produced by Avinash Kothare, Charles Aldarondo and the
On-line Distributed Proofreading Team.











THE PURPLE PARASOL


GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON




THE PURPLE PARASOL




Young Rossiter did not like the task. The more he thought of it as he
whirled northward on the Empire State Express the more distasteful it
seemed to grow.

"Hang it all," he thought, throwing down his magazine in disgust, "it's
like police work. And heaven knows I haven't wanted to be a cop since we
lived in Newark twenty years ago. Why the dickens did old Wharton marry
her? He's an old ass, and he's getting just what he might have expected.
She's twenty-five and beautiful; he's seventy and a sight. I've a notion
to chuck the whole affair and go back to the simple but virtuous
Tenderloin. It's not my sort, that's all, and I was an idiot for mixing in
it. The firm served me a shabby trick when it sent me out to work up this
case for Wharton. It's a regular Peeping Tom Job, and I don't like it."

It will require but few words to explain Sam Rossiter's presence in the
north-bound Empire Express, but it would take volumes to express his
feelings on the subject in general. Back in New York there lived Godfrey
Wharton, millionaire and septuagenarian. For two years he had been husband
to one of the prettiest, gayest young women in the city, and in the latter
days of this responsibility he was not a happy man. His wife had fallen
desperately, even conspicuously, in love with Everett Havens, the new
leading man at one of the fashionable playhouses. The affair had been
going on for weeks, and it had at last become the talk of the town. By
"the town" is meant that vague, expansive thing known as the "Four
Hundred." Sam Rossiter, two years out of Yale, was an attachment to, but
not a component part of, the Four Hundred. The Whartons were of the inner
circle.

Young Rossiter was ambitious. He was, besides, keen, aggressive, and
determined to make well for himself. Entering the great law offices of
Grover & Dickhut immediately after leaving college, he devoted himself
assiduously to the career in prospect. He began by making its foundation
as substantial as brains and energy would permit. So earnest, so
successful was he that Grover & Dickhut regarded him as the most promising
young man in New York. They predicted a great future for him, no small
part of which was the ultimate alteration of an office shingle, the name
of Rossiter going up in gilt, after that of Dickhut. And, above all,
Rossiter was a handsome, likable chap. Tall, fair, sunny-hearted, well
groomed, he was a fellow that both sexes liked without much effort.

The Wharton trouble was bound to prove startling any way one looked at
it. The prominence of the family, the baldness of its skeleton, and the
gleeful eagerness with which it danced into full view left but little for
meddlers to covet. A crash was inevitable; it was the _clash_ that
Grover & Dickhut were trying to avert. Old Wharton, worn to a slimmer
frazzle than he had ever been before his luckless marriage, was determined
to divorce his insolent younger half. It was to be done with as little
noise as possible, more for his own sake than for hers. Wharton was proud
in, not of, his weakness.

It became necessary to "shadow" the fair d√©butante into matrimony. After
weeks of indecision Mr. Wharton finally arose and swore in accents
terrible that she was going too far to be called back. He determined to
push, not to pull, on the reins. Grover & Dickhut were commanded to get
the "evidence"; he would pay. When he burst in upon them and cried in his
cracked treble that "the devil's to pay," he did not mean to cast any
aspersion upon the profession in general or particular. He was annoyed.

"She's going away next week," he exclaimed, as if the lawyers were to
blame for it.

"Well, and what of it?" asked Mr. Grover blandly.

"Up into the mountains," went on Mr. Wharton triumphantly.

"Is it against the law?" smiled the old lawyer.

"Confound the law! I don't object to her going up into the mountains for
a rest, but--"

"It's much too hot in town for her, I fancy."

"How's that?" querulously. "But I've just heard that that scoundrel
Havens is going to the mountains also."

"The same mountain?"

"Certainly. I have absolute proof of it. Now, something has to be done!"

And so it was that the promising young lawyer, Samuel W. Rossiter, Jr.,
was sent northward into the Adirondacks one hot summer day with
instructions to be tactful but thorough. He had never seen Mrs. Wharton,
nor had he seen Havens. There was no time to look up these rather
important details, for he was off to intercept her at the little station
from which one drove by coach to the quiet summer hotel among the clouds.
She was starting the same afternoon. He found himself wondering whether
this petted butterfly of fashion had ever seen him, and, seeing him, had
been sufficiently interested to inquire, "Who is that tall fellow with the
light hair?" It would be difficult to perform the duties assigned to him
if either she or Havens knew him for what he was. His pride would have
been deeply wounded if he had known that Grover & Dickhut recommended him
to Wharton as "obscure."

"They say she is a howling beauty as well as a swell," reflected
Rossiter, as the miles and minutes went swinging by. "And that's something
to be thankful for. One likes novelty, especially if it's feminine. Well,
I'm out for the sole purpose of saving a million or so for old Wharton,
and to save as much of her reputation as I can besides. With the proof in
hand the old duffer can scare her out of any claim against his bank
account, and she shall have the absolute promise of 'no exposure' in
return. Isn't it lovely? Well, here's Albany. Now for the dinky road up to
Fossingford Station. I have an hour's wait here. She's coming on the
afternoon train and gets to Fossingford at eleven-ten to-night. That's a
dickens of a time for a young woman to be arriving anywhere, to say
nothing of Fossingford."

Loafing about the depot at Albany, Rossiter kept a close lookout for Mrs.
Wharton as he pictured her from the description he carried in his mind's
eye. Her venerable husband informed him that she was sure to wear a white
shirt-waist, a gray skirt, and a Knox sailor hat, because her maid had
told him so in a huff. But he was to identify her chiefly by means of a
handsome and oddly trimmed parasol of deep purple. Wharton had every
reason to suspect that it was a present from Havens, and therefore to be
carried more for sentiment than protection.

A telegram awaited him at Fossingford Station. Fossingford was so small
and unsophisticated that the arrival of a telegraphic message that did not
relate to the movement of railroad trains was an "occasion." Everybody in
town knew that a message had come for Samuel Rossiter, and everybody was
at the depot to see that he got it. The station agent had inquired at the
"eating-house" for the gentleman, and that was enough. With the eyes of a
Fossingford score or two upon him, Rossiter read the despatch from Grover
& Dickhut.

"Too bad, ain't it?" asked the agent, compassionately regarding the
newcomer. Evidently the contents were supposed to be disappointing.

"Oh, I don't know," replied Rossiter easily. But just the same he was
troubled in mind as he walked over and sat down upon his steamer trunk in
the shade of the building. The telegram read:

"She left New York five-thirty this evening. Stops over night Albany.
Fossingford to-morrow morning. Watch trains. Purple parasol. Sailor hat.
Gray travelling suit.

"G. and D."

It meant that he would be obliged to stay in Fossingford all night--but
where? A general but comprehensive glance did not reveal anything that
looked like a hotel. He thought of going back to Albany for the night, but
it suddenly occurred to him that she might not stop in that city, after
all. Pulling his wits together, he saw things with a new clearness of
vision. Ostensibly she had announced her intention to spend the month at
Eagle Nest, an obscure but delightful hotel in the hills; but did that
really mean that she would go there? It was doubtless a ruse to throw the
husband off the track. There were scores of places in the mountains, and
it was more than probable that she would give Eagle Nest a wide berth.
Rossiter patted his bump of perceptiveness and smiled serenely until he
came plump up against the realization that she might not come by way of
Fossingford at all, or, in any event, she might go whisking through to
some station farther north. His speculations came to an end in the shape
of a distressing resolution. He would remain in Fossingford and watch the
trains go by!

After he had dashed through several early evening trains, the cheerful,
philosophical smile of courage left his face and trouble stared from his
eyes. He saw awkward prospects ahead. Suppose she were to pass through on
one of the late night trains! He could not rush through the sleepers, even
though the trains stopped in Fossingford for water.

Besides, she could not be identified by means of a gray suit, a sailor
hat, and a purple parasol if they were tucked away in the berth. At eleven
o'clock he was pacing the little depot platform, waiting for the
eleven-ten train, the last he was to inspect for the night. He had eaten
a scanty meal at the restaurant nearby, and was still mad about it. The
station agent slept soundly at his post, and all the rest of the town had
gone to bed.

The train pulled in and out again, leaving him at the far end of the
platform, mopping his harassed brow. He had visited the chair-cars and had
seen no one answering the description. A half-dozen passengers huddled off
and wandered away in the darkness.

"I'll bet my head she's in one of those sleepers," he groaned, as he
watched the lights on the rear coach fade away into the night. "It's all
off till to-morrow, that's settled. My only hope is that she really
stopped in Albany. There's a train through here at three in the morning;
but I'm not detective enough to unravel the mystery of any woman's berth.
Now, where the deuce am _I_ to sleep?"

As he looked about dismally, disconsolately, his hands deep in his
pockets, his straw hat pulled low over his sleepy eyes, the station agent
came up to him with a knowing grin on his face.

"'Scuse me, boss, but she's come," he said, winking.

"She? Who?"

"Her. The young lady. Sure! She's lookin' fer you over in the
waitin'-room. You mus' 'a' missed her when she got off--thought she
wasn't comin' up till to-morrer. Mus' 'a' changed her mind. That's
a woming all over, ain't it?"

Rossiter felt himself turn hot and cold. His head began to whirl and his
courage went fluttering away. Here was a queer complication. The quarry
hunting for the sleuth, instead of the reverse. He fanned himself with his
hat for one brief, uncertain moment, dazed beyond belief. Then he
resolutely strode over to face the situation, trusting to luck to keep him
from blundering his game into her hands. Just as he was about to put his
foot upon the lamp-lit door-sill the solution struck him like a blow. She
was expecting Havens to meet her!

There was but one woman in the room, and she was approaching the door
with evident impatience as he entered. Both stopped short, she with a look
of surprise, which changed to annoyance and then crept into an nervous,
apologetic little smile; he with an unsuppressed ejaculation. She wore a
gray skirt, a white waist, and a sailor hat, and she was surpassingly good
to look at even in the trying light from the overhead lamp. Instinctively
his eye swept over her. She carried on her arm the light gray jacket, and
in one hand was the tightly rolled parasol of--he impertinently craned his
neck to see--of purple! Mr. Rossiter was face to face with the woman he
was to dog for a month, and he was flabbergasted. Even as he stopped,
puzzled, before her, contemplating retreat, she spoke to him.

"Did that man send you to me?" she asked nervously, looking through the
door beyond and then through a window at his right, quite puzzled, he
could see.

"He did, and I was sure he was mistaken. I knew of no one in this
God-forsaken place who could be asking for me," said he, collecting his
wits carefully and herding them into that one sentence. "But perhaps I
can help you. Will you tell me whom I am to look for?"

"It is strange he is not here," she said a little breathlessly. "I wired
him just what train to expect me on."

"Your husband?" ventured he admirably.

"Oh, dear, no!" said she quickly.

"I wish she'd wired me what train to expect her on," thought he grimly.
"She doesn't know me. That's good. She was expecting Havens and he's
missed connections somehow," shot rapidly through his brain. At the same
time he was thinking of her as the prettiest woman he had seen in all his
life. Then aloud: "I'll look on the platform. Maybe he's lost in this
great city. What name shall I call out?"

"Please don't call very loudly. You'll wake the dead," she said, with a
pathetic smile. "It's awfully good of you. He may come at any minute, you
know. His name is--is"--she hesitated for a second, and then went on
determinedly--"Dudley. Tall, dark man. I don't know how I shall thank you.
It's so very awkward."

Rossiter darted from her glorious but perplexed presence. He had never
seen Havens, but he was sure he could recognize an actor if he saw him in
Fossingford. And he would call him Dudley, too. It would be wise. The
search was fruitless. The only tall, dark object he saw was the mailcrane
at the edge of the platform, but he facetiously asked if its name was
Dudley. Receiving no answer, he turned back to cast additional woe into
the heart of the pretty intriguer. She was standing in the door, despair
in her eyes. Somehow he was pleased because he had not found the wretch.
She was so fair to look upon and so appealing in her distress.

"You couldn't find him? What am I to do? Oh, isn't it awful? He promised
to be here."

"Perhaps he's at a hotel."

"In Fossingford?" in deep disgust. "There's no hotel here. He was to
drive me to the home of a friend out in the country." Rossiter leaned
against the wall suddenly. There was a long silence. He could not find his
tongue, but his eyes were burning deep into the plaintive blue ones that
looked up into his face.

"I'll ask the agent," he said at last.

"Ask him what?" she cried anxiously.

"If he's been here. No, I'll ask if there's a place where you can sleep
to-night. Mr. Dudley will surely turn up to-morrow."

"But I couldn't sleep a wink. I feel like crying my eyes out," she wailed.

"Don't do that!" exclaimed he, in alarm. "I'll take another look outside."

"Please don't. He is not here. Will you please tell me what I am to
do?"--very much as if it was his business to provide for her in the hour
of need.

Rossiter promptly awoke the agent and asked him where a room could be
procured for the lady. Doxie's boarding-house was the only place,
according to the agent, and it was full to overflowing. Besides, they
would not "take in" strange women.

"She can sleep here in the waiting-room," suggested the agent. "They'll
let you sleep in the parlor over at Doxie's, mister--maybe."

Rossiter did not have the heart to tell her all that the agent said. He
merely announced that there was no hotel except the depot waiting-room.

"By the way, does Mr. Dudley live out in the country?" he asked
insidiously. She flushed and then looked at him narrowly.

"No. He's visiting his uncle up here."

"Funny he missed you."

"It's terribly annoying," she said coldly. Then she walked away from him
as if suddenly conscious that she should not be conversing with a
good-looking stranger at such a time and place and under such peculiar
circumstances. He withdrew to the platform and his own reflections.

"He's an infernal cad for not meeting her," he found himself saying, her
pretty, distressed face still before him. "I don't care a rap whether
she's doing right or wrong--she's game. Still, she's a blamed little fool
